[Music]
so
hey everybody welcome to healthy
conversations i'm your host travis
christopherson
this podcast series brings health
experts from a variety of fields with
the primary focus of disease prevention
health span and health optimization in
other words how do you look and feel
your best our first guest our very first
guest is dr jason fung dr fung is a
researcher and a new york times
best-selling author with five books now
the obesity code the complete guide to
fasting the diabetes code and his latest
book which is the one we're going to
talk about today the cancer code this
book and this interview i i really
can't say how much i enjoyed them
they're absolutely fascinating the book
really is this sort of sweeping
historical and scientific exploration of
a very simple question which is what is
cancer and by that
we mean the exact molecular cellular
events that conspire to create the
disease and this is so fundamentally
important to understand because out of
that everything is dictated cancer
treatments cancer prevention everything
what i
enjoyed was how dr funk brought into
this narrative all of this sort of
epidemiological data research from
multiple angles
and it was almost like puzzle pieces
that sort of coalesced give insight into
how cancer behaves i particularly love
this section towards the end where he
walks through the events that we now
know happen over decades that lead to
the culmination of cancer it's almost
like it's it's story within a story and
if you have read cancer research you
realize it's presented almost like
pixels
and this book takes those pixels and
sort of coalesces them all into a movie
that has a beginning a middle and an end
that's what i appreciated so much about
the book and the way he presents in the
interview and we also talk a lot about
the risk factors that relate to cancer
the most important ones and surprisingly
dietary is is one of the largest risk
factors with regard to cancer prevention
so we talk a lot about that particularly
in the context of insulin which is
important to everybody because i think
most know now that the standard american
diet is very heavy in its promotion of
insulin so we kind of drill down into
that topic
in regard to the context of cancer risk
and finally this interview series is
brought to you by avert avert is a
physician-led prevention program within
stage zero life sciences avert centers
on the detection of the earliest
predictive markers of cancer and chronic
disease using a very comprehensive panel
of blood markers that look at metabolic
function and inflammation and a novel
early stage cancer blood biopsy this is
a company that i am part of and i'm very
excited about because it's a it's a
unique collaboration of physicians and
scientists with a very specific mission
of keeping people healthy prevention and
we are very grateful that dr fung has
helped in this mission as one of the
members of the avert science advisory
board
so without further ado let's get to the
interview with dr jason fun
jason how are you good how are you i'm
doing good now
you were in toronto where in addition to
writing books that the world can't get
enough of you're a full-time
nephrologist
yep yep you're one of these people to
make us all feel lazy
you know it's really interesting now
that i have the chance to work with a
lot of physicians
the time management skills are
incredible they they can squeeze more
into it an hour than i can into a week
is that something that just comes with
medical school and residency and
practice
um i think it's just when there's a lot
to do then you have to be a bit more
efficient on everything probably
hyper efficient
we're going to talk about the cancer
code which i believe is the fourth book
is that correct
yeah and the third one i've done by
myself i did some some with other people
but okay
the now
at the outset in the book you you say
this book is a story of the exploration
of cancer
and what i appreciated what i enjoyed so
much about the book was you returned to
this simple question over and over of
what is cancer
and as you and i have talked about
before
this seems to be something that gets
kind of marginalized
in in the cancer community i mean this
this disease has been studied to death
when you type in cancer and do a pubmed
search there's over three million hits
and you get the impression that
there's this overwhelming repository of
data on these very specific things like
looking at the trees
instead of the forest and what i
appreciate is that simple question where
you look to connect these dots you're
looking to at the trees in in
context of an entire forest
and what i what i think is so what you
did so well
is
the story is incredibly constructive and
what i mean by story is this sort of
historical narrative of humanity's
understanding of again back to the
simple question what is cancer
and you have you have a wonderful quote
and this again is constantly throughout
the theme of the book is the most
pressing question in cancer research is
remains the most elusive what is cancer
and so this story again you know is
scientifically fascinating trying to
understand what cancer is
and there's a lot of good drama you know
dramatic scientific stories
for example the search to understand
what space-time gravity is in physics
and einstein came along and sort of
overturned the newtonian version
and this was it took decades and was
highly charged dramatic but with the
cancer narrative
there's this added dimension
to not only the the scientific
understanding of what are these cellular
events that conspire to create cancer
but the
life-and-death struggle that marches
alongside of it
the the dramatic
you know lives were at stake and and the
therapies spin out of our understanding
of cancer so let's start there let's
start with what in the book you called
version 1.0 of cancer what was this
version 1.0
yeah so these are the what i call the
cancer paradigms and um you know
paradigm is a word that gets vastly
overused but it's really the way we
understand the disease
and it's important because the way you
understand the disease sort of tells you
how you're going to treat the disease
so for example if you have a disease
like a bacteria a bacterial infection
then your understanding of that disease
as a bacterial infection is important
because then you're going to use
antibiotics as opposed to as if it were
a metabolic disease of course then you
would never use
antibiotics it would simply make no
sense so it's really important to
understand sort of what we think is
causing the cancer what the cancer is
because that's going to that's going to
tell you how to treat it so the first
great sort of
modern paradigm of cancer was simply as
a cell that grows excessively so it's a
cell that grows too much and that was um
you know sounds sort of trite but it's
it's it's how we look at it and then you
know if you look at sort of the ancient
paradigms they were quite different you
know huge differences in humor and all
this sort of stuff but if you look at
this
disease as a simply a cell that grows
too much well
then you say well how are you going to
treat it well the answer is simple you
kill it you have too much growth you try
to kill it and that really even today
the mainstay of cancer treatment so what
you try to do of course is you try to
cut it out which is surgical treatment
you try to burn it which is radiation
and you try to poison it which is
chemotherapy so those three sort of
pillars of of even now of modern
oncology are basically ways to
selectively kill cells you try to kill
the cancer slightly faster than you kill
the patient
that's really it because if you give
chemotherapy it's really just a poison
that attacks those cancer cells a little
bit better than they attack your regular
cells you give too much you get all the
side effects you get your hair falling
out you get the the ulcers in the
stomach you get the nausea you get the
vomiting and those are all the side
effects and and it's not to sort of
minimize this paradigm it was quite
important the development of
chemotherapy and different ways to
combine the chemotherapy still you know
they sort of revolutionize the treatment
of cancer things like hodgkin's lymphoma
and a lot of the pediatric cancers of
course
are are treated quite successfully with
various regimens of you know
drug a plus drug b plus direct c plus
drug d plus surgery plus minus radiation
sort of thing so but but but that is the
way you look at cancer by the 60s things
started to change a little bit
and we started to go sort of one level
in knowledge deeper that is what we
wanted to do was understand why these
cells were growing right so that these
cells are growing is not
in dispute
um what we're trying to do is understand
the sort of why of what's happening and
of course with the the revolution and
genetics
what we began to understand was that um
it's
due to genes so we have genes that
control growth so those are those were
discovered and they're called oncogenes
now so they're actually natural genes
that turn on growth and there's also
genes that turn off growth and these are
called tumor suppressing genes so
when you you know activate those genes
they'll actually slow things down so you
basically have an accelerator sort of
and a break so if you turn on this gene
it's going to accelerate growth if you
turn on this gene it's going to be like
a break and it's going to slow down
growth so the the whole point is that
once you understand that you know this
is a a problem in the gene that is
controlling the growth and that's why
things are growing too much then you can
have entirely different treatments and
that's sort of the next great paradigm
which is cancer paradigm i call it 2.0
which is the genetic paradigm which is
that this is a genetic disease and
therefore we need to look at these
genes and try to turn them on and off
and
by the sort of 90s we started to get
these new treatments
and there was a couple of just
incredible treatments that we came up
with one was gleevec
or
imatinib which is a drug used for a type
a certain type of leukemia
very very very successful i mean it was
just a total game changer really and
what it did was there was a specific
genetic defect called the philadelphia
chromosome which led to this abnormal
protein called the bcr able protein and
they developed this drug to counter
that protein
and when you gave it it is a pill you
basically cured like 90 of this cancer
and that was just unheard of like it was
like wow
and what you're doing is you're you've
changed paradigms so what you're doing
is you're no longer trying
to kill cells
you're trying to fix the gene problem
which is totally different the toxicity
is much lower so you could give this
drug it had very little toxicity and
then you had another drug very soon
after that which was a breast cancer
drug
herceptin
which again didn't look at trying to
kill cancer cells it was trying to fix
that specific gene defect it was even
more successful in a way because not
only did they target that gene defect
but they actually couldn't treat
everybody because not every breast
cancer would have
um the her2 new
gene mutation so what they did was they
developed a test to see if they had this
mutation so you weren't simply treating
every single patient with cancer because
not everybody's going to benefit and
this sort of ushered in the era of
personalized treatment let me let me
quick summarize so the version 1.0
paradigm 1.0 we knew that cancer was
pathological cell growth
and the treatments spun out of that
obviously where this where surgery which
has been around for a long time
radiation now over 100 years
and chemotherapy which really came
around
around world war ii
then watson and crick elucidated the
structure of dna
it was known that there was mutations in
cancer
version 2.0 paradigm was this somatic
mutation model where these sequential
mutations rewire the cell towards
proliferation and give it the hallmark
features of cancer right
these eight sort of consistent
phenotypes that we all see all the time
in cancer
so this set this theoretical paradigm we
target these mutations
we had these home run successes in
gleevac herceptin
and the era of targeted medicine was
ushered in and all of this led up to
2006 on the heels of the human genome
project
genome sequencing became so efficient
and cheap that we could now
actually entertain a project called the
cancer genome atlas and this at this
point was almost like an engineering
project the theory we thought was locked
out
so we could find these mutations
specific to each cancer type develop
these targeted drugs
what happened then
yeah and and at it's sort of by the
2000s there's this huge optimism that
we're just going to cure cancer this way
because we had finally found that we
moved past this sort of first paradigm
he got into the genetic paradigm which
was the somatic mutation theory um and
so what we thought
was that
hey
you know
for each type of cancer what we're going
to do is we're going to find the two or
three mutations that are key key
and if you find that then you can find a
drug that's going to block it or alter
it in a beneficial way and therefore you
will cure cancer you just have it's just
a matter of finding the mutations and
then developing or finding those drugs
that are going to target those mutations
but you know
we had the whole world working on this
you know tons of money was being
developed on it and so it was really
just a matter of time so
with the human genome project they it
took them years to sequence the the
genes of one person
and that was a huge breakthrough at the
time but of course the technology moved
so quickly after that that
a few years after that they started the
cancer genome atlas because they said
well
first of all everybody's genes are
different so what you want to know is
you want to take each cancer and each
person and sequence those i think it was
like 33 000 cancers in like all
different types and all different this
and they're just gonna sequence them all
because if you got a couple thousand
tumor samples sequence them then you
could say okay well this is the one gene
that is responsible for sort of like 70
and this gene is worth 20 and then you
could block them right
and that took um a few more years
they finally published their data i
think in 2018
and of course there was very little
success in terms of real treatments that
improved patients outcome after that
and it wasn't because there were too few
they couldn't find the mutations we
could find the mutations no
it was because there were just so many
mutations i mean they they keep a
database of all these mutations and
instead of like
so if you took colon cancer instead of
like two or three
mutations there were like hundreds of
mutations the total number of mutations
i think in this in this catalog
and it's still growing of course in 2018
with some like six million different
mutations well
that's a real problem because now
you can't
create six million different drugs each
drug takes 15 years to develop
so it's like an impossible task
so
not only that but each cancer wasn't had
didn't have two or three mutations
it wasn't like if you developed a cancer
you had this two mutations then you
could use those two drugs
each cancer like a colon cancer these
are common types of cancers might have a
hundred different mutations
so again
impossible to go from knowing that to a
logical treatment because you can't
treat that patient with 100 drugs
and the other problem of course is that
there were like millions of mutations so
this person
a and chemo clinic with it's his hundred
mutations of colon and you know the
patient b with the similar looking colon
cancer
would have a hundred mutations
completely different than patient day
so again it's a completely impossible
task to go from knowing that information
to developing um rational logical
treatments for people and that was
really how
that whole somatic mutation theory
really fell apart it failed to deliver
a lot of meaningful drugs there were
some very good ones
but something like five and it struck to
the heart of cancer theory as well i
mean from a theoretical standpoint it
looked like a checkmate
um
the inter-tumoral heterogeneity that you
talk about from patient a to patient b
and the
inter-intra-tumoral heterogeneity
meaning within the single tumor there
was
there could be wildly different
mutations and metastatic sites again
even more mutations and so you write at
this time
the stalemate in cancer stands in stark
contrast to the dizzying progress in
other areas of medicine from 69 to 2014
total deaths from heart disease dropped
approximately 1 17
despite increasing population
but cancer during the same time period
deaths from cancer rose a chilling 84
percent
james watson noted in the 2009 new york
times opinion piece the cancer killed
56 560 000 americans in 2006
200 000 more than in 1970 before the war
war on cancer had begun
um
so it
it was a deflating time period right i
mean especially in contrast that we had
these first those first two home run
drugs you talked about
but then you go on to say
then we started winning after 2014
cancer death rates began to drop
and you attribute this to again a
slowing in cigarette smoking
but also to a new paradigm a new
understanding of cancer that allowed
sort of new therapies to to be developed
and this is
to the sort of final episode where we
are today this this version 3.0
so let's talk a little bit about that
what what has changed and what is this
new understanding of what cancer is yeah
the third sort of major shift was to go
from a purely uh genetic so so the
somatic mutation theory
the way they imagine cancer developing
was that you had a single cancer cell
associated breast cancer so you have
breast cancer cell
and it
sequentially gathers the necessary
mutations to become a cancer
and this was one of the things that uh
it would predict is that one that each
cell after that so after it gets all the
necessary mutations then it would um
you know it would become cancer and then
all of the subsequent cancers would be
genetically very similar
that's important because then the entire
solid tumor mass is all going to have
the same mutations and when you treat
that with a drug the entire mass is
going to be affected
it wasn't true in any way
when you actually took a tumor like a
breast cancer
there was
multiple multiple sub-populations
so within the that primary tumor you
might have two or three or four or five
different
types like different
genetic profiles
the breast cancer that had metastasized
would have a completely different
profile from the one that was in the
breast the one that the breast cancer
that moved to the lung for example
looked completely different
so even within you know within one
patient the different sites of cancer
would have different
mutations the nodal like the lymph nodes
would have different mutations and
within the tumor you might have multiple
different mutations as well so this
whole idea that you had a single genetic
mass this uh
it didn't hold true
um and the other thing about so somatic
mutation theory said that it was all
sort of genetically homogeneous and it
said that these mutations were picked up
randomly and this is a big problem so
because if you think about smoking
smoking clearly one of the big causes of
cancer
it's not targeted mutation it's not like
smoke goes in and says i'm going to
target this gene
and change it in this way
it's just a non-specific sort of chronic
irritant right that's what tobacco smoke
is so why is it causing
mutations within growth
genes like it doesn't make any sense and
if it's purely random
why do cancers look all the same
like if you go in
and you say okay well here's some paint
and go paint something and you know 50
people paint exactly the same thing like
down to the breaststroke brush stroke
well there's nothing random about it so
if you have
cancers that are developing
so in person a person b person c and so
on in the thousands of people
they are all very similar like cancers
look more like each other than the
people look like each other the cancers
are very similar so therefore there's
nothing random about these mutations
they must have been targeted in some way
even though the genetic the way they got
there like the genotype might be
completely different but the phenotype
was always the same and this is
preserved through history so if you have
a black
man in 2020 and a japanese woman in 1920
they could be different sexes different
you know uh
raises half a world apart one century
apart those two cancers will still look
identical well how is that possible
right it doesn't make any sense if they
were all purely random mutations so this
whole somatic mutation theory just
didn't make any sense at all but worse
it didn't come up with enough good
treatments to slow down the rate of uh
cancer so the third uh sort of so so
everybody sort of had to go back to the
drawing board so clearly there were
genetic
you know mutations that's not the issue
what you're now trying to understand is
again trying to go sort of one step
further and say why are these genes
mutating right and that's how you get to
the sort of third grade paradigm which
is this evolutionary paradigm
which to me is a totally fascinating
story like uh you know it makes a lot of
sense it answers a lot of things and
what people are what this this
theory
says
is that in fact
the
the genes may take but they're it's a
directed sort of mutation just like
evolution if you think about evolution
suppose you have uh two birds and this
is uh from darwin so this is how he
discovered it
supposedly so if you have two birds and
one of them lives on nuts
they all have very thick beaks
the ones who live on fruit have very
very thin long beaks because it's easier
to eat the fruit
and the reason they develop is because
the environment selected those mutations
that are advantageous so in that
environment which had nuts
favored the development of those thick
peaks when you had a spontaneous
mutation that produced a thicker beak it
would be advantageously have an
advantage of survival the ones the
environment
which has the very uh you know has a lot
of fruit favors the thinner longer beaks
right so it's the environment
that tells you which mutations are going
to develop
and this takes you out of to purely
genetic right so in the somatic mutation
theory there is no consideration for the
environment at all
it's simply a number of random mutations
that are coalescing at the same time
and the reason they coalesce they say
because if you have a you know smoke
it's it's it's increasing the rate of
mutation and therefore you're getting
more mutations that's why you're getting
more cancer but it it doesn't sort of
explain why those mutations are all the
same mutation and they all look the same
and they all sort of converge on this
thing whereas
in the evolutionary theory you're saying
that well all all of these mutations are
directed
at surviving in this environment so now
you're sort of looking at not only the
sort of seed but also the soil which is
a much more comprehensive way of looking
at things and this evolutionary paradigm
then says
okay well if it's if it's mutating
then what is the sort of selective
pressure what is the environment and
what are these mutations
so there was a lot of work in the sort
of 2010s
looking at sort of one what are these
mutations really
like
what's the sort of rhyme or reason of
mutations and the whole thing sort of
got started in the in 2000 the sort of
the beginnings of this theory when
people started to look at what makes a
cancer a cancer and this was sort of a
sort of revolutionary thought and
it's interesting because
you know you have cancers like a breast
cancer and a liver cancer
they're quite different so they have
different staging systems they they
react differently they behave
differently
in 2000 uh two researchers decided that
hey
let's let's like these are all different
different diseases breast cancer is
different than liver cancer
but they're all they're both cancer so
what are the commonalities let's not
look at the differences let's look at
the commonalities of what mason cancer
and this became sort of the most cited
paper in in the the history of of cancer
research and these were called the
hallmarks of cancer that was the paper
they they revised it they added two more
and there were sort of eight hallmarks
of cancer
and it's important because now you're
starting to look at cancer as a unified
disease as opposed to
30 different types of diseases that was
a striking realization for me just
simply from the fact that when you're
talking about cancer being a collection
of random or random processing mutations
and the mutational profile is so
different from one cancer to the next
how do you get this consistency right
those eight hallmark features all the
time
and you describe it so well in the book
about
the the seed in the soil this
evolutionary process of cancer and
i think it's important to note that
what
this is talking about really is
cancer was described as a forward
evolutionary process
and this this new sort of paradigm looks
at at it as a backward evolutionary
process in other words these seeds of
cancer
we all have in us within us within every
cell
and what they are are
step back one second
life builds evolutionarily
so the majority of the planet
was that was unicellular life then
multicellular life came along and these
cells had to sign contracts with each
other to live in the collective
but we still retain the genes for
multicellularity
for unicellular i'm sorry
and those are the seeds within us and so
you describe it so well i love the part
of the book towards the end where you
just walk through the stages of cancer
from a molecular level
and
it takes an irritation it takes a
sub-lethal chronic
damage the cell begins to revert back to
the survival mechanism right these early
genes of unicellularity and that makes
sense from this you know what you're so
good at is this top-down view of cancer
that makes sense with these hallmark
features you have this consistency
because these genes are being
upregulated
and now the mutational process comes
into play and now you can knock out a
gene like p53 or ra k ras
and it of course shifts the cancer
towards a cancerous phenotype but it's
not necessarily required
right half of cancers do not have a p53
mutation
so that seed
is so important that i can't stress
enough i think how
this understanding of cancer
is so critical to our knowledge of how
to treat it
and um
now
then you shift in the book to the soil
which i think is is so interesting and
you go back to
a time
these in i think the mid 80s there was
two epidemiologists in the uk
who looked at the root causes of cancer
and were able to
narrow it down to well what is what is
it different what's different about the
soil that's causing cancer of course
tobacco smoke i think was
accounts for about 35 percent of all all
cancers but then diet they found that
diet plays a role of 30
so so what is it about you you go
through the okay then begin this this
quest to find what is it in the diet
that is carcinogenic that can make the
soil more fertile
you go through fiber fat vitamins
and then you find finally go to this
link between
obesity diabetes and cancer
so talk a little bit about that
yeah that's the um interesting part is
that we've always known that the
environment actually plays a huge role
which makes sense if you think about it
as an evolutionary disease because the
environment is of course
what is the most important thing so
we've always known that diet plays a
role
and the thing about the um
the thing about the somatic mutation
theory that was so sort of
detrimental in a way is that how it sort
of
ignored the role of environment but at
the same time
you had to say well we know a lot about
what causes cancer they're called
carcinogens we have huge lists
of carcinogens tobacco smoke best as you
know soot
so there's there's these massive lists
of carcinogens and then yeah at the same
time people are saying well it's just a
random genetic event it's like what are
you talking about right that doesn't
even make any sense
so
uh so so when you look at the list of
carcinogens uh you know those two
researchers said well diet is 30 that's
a huge number because tobacco smoke of
course is a big
very important
everything else was like two percent
like all this stuff that we think is
important the chemicals and the
pesticides and
the
radiation and stuff
not that they're not carcinogens they
are carcinogens but in terms of
magnitude of importance there's only two
that are super super super important
tobacco smoke and so that's what really
caused a lot of the downturn in
the mortality of cancer of course was
people stop smoking so we found that out
sort of in the 60s 70s you know
it didn't really take hold until
probably the 80s and then you still had
this lag where people are still smoking
that's why lung cancer is still the top
killer um you know you think back to
days i mean you sort of shudder these
days now right but you know you'll
you'll remember when
uh airlines had those little uh ashtray
things on the scene yeah well
you doctors were promoting i remember
there's a commercial with the doctor in
the white coat saying camel cigarettes
were were less irritating yeah
so it was crazy and and you remember
these things like the
uh smoking and non-smoking section of
the
restaurant because those little walls
would you know prevent the smoke i mean
it was so it took a long time for that
but it did happen and of course that
does play a huge role but then the other
huge one so just behind it at 30 percent
is diet and and to get almost no play
not that we haven't looked but you know
we looked for all these different things
so we spent a long time looking at
dietary fat of course because dietary
fat was the villain of the day right it
was causing everything it was causing
heart disease turned out not to be true
it was causing obesity turned out not
really to be true and therefore hey of
course it's gonna cause cancer so that
turned out not to be true either and we
spend a lot of money and a lot of time
and there are several massive studies
looking at colon cancer looking at
breast cancer and you couldn't really
put a link between the two it was very
very hard so then they they they looked
at up their things and again spent
massive amounts of money looking at
cancer as a vitamin deficiency disease
so practically every vitamin was tested
so they gave people vitamin a and
vitamin b vitamin c vitamin d and
vitamin e and vitamin k
and omega-3s
you name it they tested it and these
trials of course which a lot of were
published in the really top top-notch
medical journals they take like 10 years
to do and like 50 million dollars like
these are big studies the one that i
like the most was the um well
theoretically is a beautiful study right
cigarette smoke is oxidizing creates
free radicals which create mutations
so let's give
smokers beta-carotene which is a potent
antioxidant
and then they gave smokers there was a
control group with no beta-carotene that
the treatment group with beta-carotene i
think after five six seven eight years
they stopped the trial because the
smokers getting beta-carotene were
getting i think it was 20 more cancer
so it just shows when we have this
simple paradigm
you know human biology is incredibly
complex and there's always a law of
undertaking unattended consequences so
that was that was a pretty illuminating
study yeah it was in several studies too
and folic acid and vitamin b's and stuff
you saw this increasing rate of cancer
and it was just you know so so it wasn't
a vitamin deficiency disease the way
that say scurvy is vitamin c deficiency
you give vitamin c everybody gets better
um but then what really turned out to be
the the one big link and this wasn't
really well appreciated until the mid
2000s so it was very recent because i
did medical school in the 90s and we
were still talking about dietary fat
causing cancer and stuff that's what i
was taught and i was taught all about
the somatic mutation theory and the
two-hit hypothesis
which turned into a three or four hit
hypothesis which really turned out to be
a hundred hit hypothesis
but um by the mid 2000s there's a couple
of big studies that were published and
they really pointed the fact that
obesity now of course the obesity
epidemic was going way up so it became a
much much more important problem than it
was in the 70s and the obesity
the obesity turned out to be very highly
linked to
not every cancer but many cancers lung
cancer of course i had no bearing at all
but a lot of the important stuff like
the breast cancers like the pancreatic
cancers colorectals liver cancer kidney
cancer endometrial cancer all of them
turned out to be highly linked to
obesity and not just specifically
obesity
but hyperinsulinemia so you can actually
uh do to take normal weight people and
and
you know segregate them on their
you know how much insulin they're
producing and of course the insulin
would drive these cancer
um
cancer rates and and again it's it's one
of these things that uh became
you know it was it was totally sort of
new in the 2000s and by now it's
actually a well-established fact there's
there's a number of cancers that are
called obesity related cancers and
they're listed by
like the world health organization so
they're well known and that of course is
a huge problem for the somatic mutation
theory because being overweight or obese
is not mutagenic like having excess body
fat doesn't increase your rate of
mutations it's just not
that has nothing to do with it
and
so then but when you look at it from the
sort of
evolutionary paradigm
then it makes a lot of sense all of
these connections start to make a lot of
sense because
insulin is a growth factor right so if
it's a growth factor you have a disease
of excessive growth if you're increasing
well
you're going to get more and there's
actually a lot of different ways that
it's related so not
just in terms of hyperinsulinemia and
obesity but also type 2 diabetes which
is also a disease of hyperinsulinia
you'll also see this exact same increase
in rate of cancer
i i found this fascinating this is in
the book
in lab studies
normal breast cells proliferate like
crazy when they're incubated with
insulin and these are cells that
normally don't respond to insulin
and
if insulin is removed from breast cancer
cultures the cells shrivel up and die
studies show that high insulin levels
and you just talked about this more than
doubles the risk of cancer regardless of
weight not obese non-diabetic people
with high insulin levels had a 250
percent increased risk of cancer cell
for cancer death that's a pretty
shocking number
yeah it is shocking and and the
important part about it of course is
that insulin levels are clearly related
to the diet right some foods are going
to increase your insulin levels if you
eat all the time your insulin levels are
going to go up if you develop overweight
and insulin resistance your insulin
levels are going to go up so it becomes
very important because it's not simply
you know correlation it's actually
something that we can do something about
because we can influence that
from our diet which is what those
researchers found
you know dr peter or sir richard pito uh
found sort of
in the i think it was the early 80s and
then they repeated the analysis in 2015
i think and they said well
basically all our original conclusions
were right
you know other than tobacco the other
thing you really have to worry about
more than anything else is the diet and
of course that connection with the diet
sort of gets almost no play because you
know other than like pesticides and
stuff
you know but the actual
mechanism might be much more related to
insulin and so on it's not a disease so
much of mutation it's a disease where
you're putting you know cells all have
that seed that cancerous seed within
them but you put them into a high growth
environment very cancer promoting
environment and they're going to
flourish as as cancers
it makes sense i mean when you when you
think about it under that's perspective
you there's some sort of irritant that's
causing the cell to revert back to this
different epigenetic expression
and then you throw on top of that growth
factors
just this over fed environment that
pushes the cell towards
cellular growth towards anabolic and
anabolic state right
and so you know it makes perfect sense
from that seed soil model and it's
interesting i think you talked about a
little bit this book
other growth factors like like um
insulin-like growth factor
which is it responds from human growth
hormone it releases igf-1
and that sets the body into an anabolic
state of growth and there's a very
interesting sort of epidemiological
study that you referred to i think
walter longo he went and lived with the
um
in ecuador in the mountain regions
there's a group of people with lauren
syndrome which is a mutation in the
igf-1 receptor so they don't respond to
growth hormone
and they have dwarfism they're very
short stature but they despite a
horrific lifestyle high smoking rates
high rates of alcoholism terrible diet
cancer is almost non-existent type 2
diabetes is almost non-existent
so it just it tends back to
we're doing something wrong right i mean
we are in this kind of overfed state all
the time and this brings back to your
to your first three books about
well i mean it's a very simple
explanation perhaps we're just overfed
perhaps we don't need to eat as much and
as often exactly and that's that's one
of the things that is important because
now all of a sudden it it's it's an
interesting story and i think that
the scientific part of it is actually
completely fascinating to me but it
actually is important another way that
you can actually do something
about influencing your risk of later
cancer and that's not something that
we've ever talked about like before
because when we had this sort of oh it's
just a random mutation uh it's just bad
luck sort of thing bad luck but it's not
there's something you can do about it
and of course if you have an
obesity-related cancer if you're not
obese you're going to reduce you're not
going to completely eliminate but you're
going to reduce your risk of cancer and
and it all falls out from this sort of
chronic damage as the cell tries to
become more like its ancestral sort of
survivalist uh
you know past
what what what fascinated me too was you
know when i was reading about this sort
of atavistic sort of uh theory that this
is actually an evolution of our cell
towards a sort of earlier time because
that was when the cell was more sort of
a survival sort of mode
um when you look at how people describe
cells pathologically they had always
used that term
primitive cells
right and a plastic comes from uh you
know the word uh sort of um anaplasia uh
same thing it's it's it's something that
refers to something very early very very
ancestral primordial right you have
leukemia cells and when you see the
leukemia cells you don't see the mature
cells you see the very immature cells
right so it's all this
talking about a reversion to an earlier
source which i call that sort of kernel
of uh sort of cancerous
cell but you have to understand that the
cancer
is not it's it's it's a set playbook
that we used sort of millions of years
ago
that worked well when we're a single
cell
works very badly
when we're in a sort of multicellular
environment because basically the
unicellular
you know as a single cell you're trying
to compete with the other cells
when you're trying to be a team you know
you have to cooperate rather than
compete
as the cell turns into this sort of
primitive form it then tries to compete
when it really you know and that's why
you know your your your cancer cell will
invade other places it'll take over the
liver it's going to try and kill off the
normal cells it does all the things that
you would expect from sort of an
invasive species which it in fact
has become
and and that's really fascinating
because
now you get into the sort of okay if
this is cancer which is an evolutionary
disease you can try to identify the
environment which is promoting its
growth the evolution is all about the
environment
and that is going to be very successful
like stop
smoking that's gonna be very successful
but if you can't do that well then what
are your options for drugs well your
body has a huge system
that's dedicated to fighting invasive
species called the immune system
and when you can sort of
toggle that the immune system you're
going to be a lot more successful in
treating cancer and that's sort of why
immunotherapy has become this
incredibly important sort of area of
research are we there yet no not really
there's still a lot to develop in terms
of trying to get our immune system but
again if you think about the paradigms
of cancer these immune treatments of
cancer they're not trying to kill cells
they're not trying to change the genetic
mutations
they're trying to treat it like a uh you
know an invasive species that has
evolved to become what it is and
therefore we're going to activate the
immune system to try and kill it it it's
fascinating too because the immune
system was another
in addition to metabolism was another
branch of
cancer therapies that was kind of
shuttled to the side through most of the
20th century now has obviously made this
huge resurgence but there are all these
clues the coley toxins i know that paul
davies talks about when you look back
through the literature before
surge or sterile surgical technique
patients often got horrible infections
post surgery
and a lot of these cancer patients that
got these terrible infections went into
these dramatic remissions
and nobody could account for that
and um
and those disappeared once sterile
surgical techniques came along so we had
all these interesting clues along the
way
and in the book you give this i love the
clue this is another sort of
clue-like um
case where
there was a 64 year old with pulmonary
fibrosis it really received a lung
transplant
and
he received it from
a woman who died when she was 51 the
lung looked healthy there was no
pathology it looked looked fine
he went on his immunosuppressive drugs
when he received the transplant but then
they found out that
the donor had had melanoma when she was
and went into remission and after
receiving a year after receiving these
immunosuppressive drugs the transplant
recipient developed melanoma
so it gives you this sort of
idea where the immune system and cancer
are in this constant balance right and
we know from from autopsies that micro
metastasize
cancer is much more ubiquitous than
previously appreciated it's in us
but there's this tension between the
immune system and
cancer all the time and i don't think we
appreciated that to its full extent but
and the other the other
thing that's very interesting is this
abscopal effect where
you talk about um from 1969 to 2018
there was
69 documented cases the scopal effect
the the vast majority of those were
reported in the last six years and now
so that for the listeners you have
scopal effect is when
you hit a single tumor site with
radiation
sometimes
the metastatic sites will respond to
that and there's no no good explanation
other than you've exposed antigens to
the immune system and the immune system
can latch on and then fight them and so
when you throw in a checkpoint inhibitor
like an immunotherapy like etruda
and you target a single tumor
this upscope effect takes takes hold and
so that is a very
again promising kind of treatment avenue
yeah i i think that's that's where you
get to once you understand this
evolutionary theory
you know things make sense so they have
scopal effect for example if you have uh
breast cancer you radiate the breast
cancer and then the radiate and then the
metastatic lesion in the liver
disappears it's like okay that should
never happen because if it's a gene
defect your you know your radiation
doesn't do it right uh if it's if it's
just local damage from radiation why
would your liver lesion disappear right
so it's clearly something more systemic
and you're exposing you know basically
you're breaking up that that cancer so
the immune system gets a good look at
the cancer and says i'm going to go kill
these types of cancer cells finds them
in the liver and kills them so it makes
perfect sense from that standpoint and
and therefore now you can investigate
ways that you can
combine these treatments in a much more
successful way because you no longer are
are limited to sort of just oh radiation
just does this well it also you know
exposes your immune system and now
you've got radiation plus your
immunotherapy so yeah and and same thing
with um you know instead of giving
maximally tolerated doses so the
standard way we give chemotherapy
is called mtd maximally tolerated dosage
which is essentially
give as much chemo as you possibly can
without killing the patient that's
basically what it is but it doesn't make
sense from an evolutionary standpoint
because when you give treatment you are
now putting a
chronic sort of
uh damage because a lot of these are
damaging chemotherapies are poisons
you're actually introducing a new
selection pressure just like when you
give massive doses of antibiotic what do
you get you get resistance right because
everything starts to develop so another
very promising treatment is to actually
just give enough chemo to keep things
under control
and
dr gattenbee has done some good research
into that and then you don't get the
resistance that you see same as with the
antibiotics exactly the same process and
you can understand it again only if you
understand the evolutionary sort of
paradigm of cancer
um so you know just these fascinating
treatments coming out of understanding
it and
and i always find it interesting because
i i've given some talks and
i'll tell you that most doctors
even oncologists have never
really thought about the evolutionary
paradigm of cancer
they don't understand it they just think
it's another you know they don't
understand sort of the importance of
how it explains what what it is that
we're seeing the other important thing
of course is to understand that
the metastasis
is actually a super early event
it's not a late event
right and and this this is important
because of some of the stuff that we
talked about so
we look at it from an evolutionary
standpoint what happens when you develop
say a cancer so you have a breast cancer
and the classical way we think about it
is that the breast cancer gets bigger
bigger bigger bigger some chunks start
to break off and fly out into the
blood and lodge and the bone or whatever
it is
it's totally wrong it's completely wrong
we know that 100
what happens is that the
cancer even before you can detect it
has already started showering out cancer
cells into the bloodstream
the thing is that most of these cancer
cells are very poorly equipped to handle
the bloodstream they just simply don't
have the tools to exist but every so
often one will become survivable enough
to sort of make that loop it travels the
bloodstream
and then gets back into the original
site the breast cancer site where it's
now protected but what has survived
has undergone evolution because it's
been subjected to these evolutionary
pressures these selection pressures of
being in that bloodstream so then after
years and years of this going on and on
what you get are different
sub-populations
of cancer developing which explains
exactly what we see
in that breast cancer which is that it's
not a single homogeneous genetically
homogeneous population it has multiple
multiple subclones within it because
it's undergone round and round and round
and round of evolutionary pressure
now eventually one of them develops
enough uh and to lodge in the in the
liver for example
and if your immune system is strong
enough
it's just going to live there
it can't survive it can't grow because
as soon as it grows the immune system
kills it which is why that that patient
had the melanoma there sit there for
like 20 years until she died of a car
accident and then as soon as they went
into the immune suppressed host
the the cancer the melanoma actually
occurred like in nine months and killed
the guy the poor guy
this is a thing of cancer that had lived
dormant for like 20 years it never got
killed but it never survived to grow
either they couldn't detect it and you
could again only understand it once you
understand the evolutionary side it's a
powerful message it's a powerful message
but the other thing that's important of
course is that
maybe you can detect these
these cells
in a liquid biopsy so now we're talking
about liquid biopsies
which is essentially taking blood
and looking for these tiny tiny tiny
concentrations of cancer cells to point
you to the fact that you might have
something brewing there because
if metastasis is an early event
we know we can actually measure these um
these these tumor cells uh in the blood
they they're very transient like they
live like less than an hour the tumors
that the cancer cells break off they go
into the blood they get killed like
right away so
but but the technology now has evolved
to the point where you can actually
detect that yeah i think that's
absolutely fascinating we've been
right with the five pre-screening
methods colonoscopies cervical they've
been around a long time the fact that
works in this technology now where we
can draw blood to detect cancer and get
such a massive head start i think you
know early detection is for makes cancer
four times more survivable because you
can just go back to this
simple
cut it out if you can just you cut it
out i want to go back just real quick to
fasting and
about this soil hypothesis fasting
because there's interesting data about
that that has come out with with falter
longo
and you talk about fasting i know
ketogenic diets are being studied
in the context of a cancer adjuvant
simply from the context you lower blood
glucose which is a preferred fuel of
cancer
and tends to make chemotherapy other
things more effective but there's v
fasting does more it not just talk about
it not only reduces insulin which is
critical but it reduces all these
nutrient sensing pathways all in one
single fell swoop so one of the
interesting clinical studies from walter
longo group is they had
patients fast for 48 to 72 hours before
chemotherapy and i know he had a brutal
time convincing oncologists to allow the
study to go on
he did and what he found was
this dramatic reduction in side effects
and objective side effects things you
can count like the number of times the
patient vomits
mouse sores the amount of hair that
falls out and it was shockingly dramatic
and now this has moved on to not only
the mitigation of side effects but can
this potentiate
chemotherapy and it does it in an
interesting way you reduce insulin you
reduce blood glucose
you set up the sort of differential
where
normal cells healthy cells can shift
ketones cancer cells sort of struggle
with that metabolic shift
so that's a that's a very interesting
sort of and cheap and free
kind of thing that should be explored
absolutely so fasting does so many
things so one if you're not on like
outside of the chemo part um you know
it's going to lower the insulin which is
a growth factor it's going to lower mtar
which is also a growth factor
highly potent growth factor i i would
add and also activate ampk which is
again one of these nutrient sensors when
you're when your cell has a lot of
energy it has a very low ampk which is
sort of an inverse thing
but um that's how metformin works also
on ampk so one of the people a lot of
people thinking that metformin has some
anti-cancer effect it's relatively mild
especially if you get overwhelmed by
insulin and mtor and stuff and just
keeping in mind that this overfed state
so insulin not only for carbs but also
protein with mtor so if you have too
much of that
it's not good but with chemotherapy it's
especially interesting because fasting
puts the cells into sort of this
regenerative mode so when insulin
sensors
when when nutrient sensors are low your
body
you know tries to stop growing
uh because that's what makes sense right
your body your cells are sort of
shutting down there's no energy so you
go into this more quiescent state you go
into a slower growth uh cycle and then
when you hit them with chemotherapy
chemotherapy typically affects those
cells that are growing the fastest so
what you do is which
you try and put these cells into the
slower growth mode so
when you hit them with a chemotherapy
they actually are going to have less
damage because they're not growing as
fast so therefore all the side effects
like the hair loss and vomiting so
vomiting often is because the cells of
the gi tract the epithelial cells within
your gi tract are very rapidly turning
over so that's why they sustain so much
damage so you give chemotherapy you kill
the cancer cell which is growing fast
but you kill the the
the gi tract epithelial cells the lining
of the uh gi tract as well so you get
vomiting you get ulcers and all kinds of
stuff
um so the fasting actually put them into
a slower growth mode so they'll actually
sustain less damage the chemo the the
the cancer of course can't do that
because it's sort of programmed to go go
go so therefore it gets as much as you
can so you could do one of two things
you could actually tolerate it more so
you don't ever have to reduce the dose
like you often do sometimes so for
example and
when you treat people
sometimes they have to reduce the dose
of chemo because they're just getting
too many side effects so if you're
getting less side effects you don't have
to reduce the dose and therefore you're
going to get better effect on that
cancer um it may actually improve the
effect of of it on the cancer as well
but that's a little bit more
questionable but again here's a
a treatment that is completely free has
been used for thousands of years that
could improve the effect in a very
specific role uh just before
chemotherapy the reason why
you know uh they had trouble convincing
people is because you get this cancer
cachexia where people lose weight with
cancer and people and that's a totally
different process than uh it's not just
eating right because
when when you uh lose weight um your
metabolic rate usually goes down
that doesn't happen with cancer cachexia
so as you lose weight your body's just
burning still as much energy as it does
before that's why the weight just goes
down and down and down now it's a lot
more complicated than just
sort of oh the calories and all that
stuff there's a lot more going on with
cancer capexia
and unfortunately what happens is people
say well you know therefore you should
always try and feed people and stuff and
that's why you shouldn't fast
you know i understand that hesitancy but
with the with the
understanding that we have and some of
the clinical data that they've done it
it seems like a pretty good effect
especially if you're going to limit that
in duration to just sort of before the
chemotherapy
but also for people who are
relatively well if they have you know
breast cancer or colon cancer then they
can apply the intermittent fasting to
prevent recurrence to try and reduce the
risk of recurrence so many different
ways you can use it
once you understand the sort of uh
evolutionary paradigm
yeah
well we got through about half of what i
wanted to talk about but absolutely
fascinating discussion i you know i
thank you for your book it was it was to
me
um
just such a wonderful exploration of
cancer
again back to the simple question but
these treatments and promising
treatments that are spinning out of this
so we got to do this again jason yeah
for sure i mean i'll tell you that i
think the the the story itself from a
scientific standpoint was just utterly
fascinating like you know i
before i did wrote it i had no idea
you know how far it had come and the
implications it had but it's just a
fascinating it's still unfolding you
know it's it's it's funny every
generation thinks that they're in the
modern edge and they are by definition
but you tend to stop there like we know
this but we don't i mean we're still in
the early innings of completely
understanding what this is early innings
i mean so many people are still stuck in
the somatic mutation theory
i i talk to people all the time and
they're like yeah of course it's genetic
disease we know that it's like no it's
not
and honestly what's interesting to me is
that how few people know about it and
how few people even talk about it even
within cancer researchers right nobody
cares it's like wow well that's why
davies was so refreshing you have a
cosmologist come along
right the nci
funded that project to have fresh eyes
look at this and hired cosmologists and
he
he came up with just some fascinating
insights and he didn't do anything novel
he just connected dots we connected
information nice information that had
been out there for a long time yeah the
oncologist hate him though
well that's the early stage of every new
paradigm it always goes through those
phases right yeah absolutely well thank
you so much we'll let you get back to
your patients they need you much more
than we do so thanks again take care
thanks it's great talk travis okay take
care bye
[Music]
you